---
title: "reviews"
bg: orange
color: black
fa-icon: toggle-on
---

# PIRATEBOX
## Project Status: Inactive

## Concept: **** (4 out of 5)

## Execution: ★★★☆☆ (3 out of 5)

## Community: ★☆☆☆☆ (1 out of 5)

## Website: http://piratebox.cc & /r/piratebox

## Personal Comments
My first install of PirateBox was about 5 years ago. Since then I've built 3 or 4 pirateboxes, mostly for fun, once for work. I've had a great time with my PirateBoxes and I felt an actual twinge of pain when they announced they were shutting down development.

## What Exactly Is It?
It's a file-sharing / chat / forums server you can install on a wifi hotspot. You basically take one of those mini TP-Link hotspots (examples here, here, buy on Tokopedia here or on eBay here), plug a cheap USB dongle in, and flash an embedded Linux variant called OpenWRT onto it. The hotspot becomes a cute little Linux server that you can bring in your handbag or attach to the bottom of your skateboard.

## Use Cases
A Personal Area Network that you can bring around so you can chat with your friends without an FMC-owned server. Just give your friends the hotspot's wifi password and you're set -- once a device is connected it is immediately redirected into the Piratebox's main page,

Your own personal Netflix. Download your entire collection of movies into the USB dongle and let your friends and family access the movies! If you have the latest version of VLC, you can even stream a movie without downloading it.

A digital library. Plug it into a wall socket in a public place, change the SSID to "Free_Book_ Library" or similar, and let anyone download books from the device. This is particularly useful in totalitarian countries such as China, where a lot of Western books are banned.

A public dropbox. Place it in a public location, give it a trickle of power (one of those solar powered chargers actually work really well -- I tried it and my Piratebox ran for days), and let anyone share anything to everyone. You'd be surprised what people upload.

(Evil HaXX0r use case) A phishing box. I'm not going to give any details on this one, but remember that you can set up a custom login page for your Piratebox, which means you can theme it to any login theme you want. Your building's wifi login, for example. Or even a Google login page.

## Why Hasn't It Caught On?
The branding. "PirateBox" sounds scary and they used a skull-and-crossbones logo, which made it also *look* scary for the general public. The default install has a start page that says something like "Don't worry! You're not being hacked. Breathe. Relax." which probably wouldn't relax a ton of people. As a result interactions with public Pirateboxes usually end up *seeming* dodgy or negative, which didn't really help with adoption. The fact that you can use a Piratebox to do bad stuff (see "Evil HaXX0r use case", above) probably wasn't very good either.

Piratebox uses HTTP, not HTTPS, for obvious reasons. (It's a local server with no CA credentials and mostly no access to the internet.) This means that newer browsers would flag every page it loads with the dreaded "This page might be unsafe" icon next to the URL.

OpenWRT is getting harder and harder to flash on routers. The latest firmware updates aren't friendly to flashing, so if you're keen to try this out, don't let your router update before you flash it.

## What's Next for Piratebox?
As you can see from the subheader text, the project itself is inactive (no more forum support, no active development schedule), but the repo is still online and there is an active subreddit. You can still install it and run it, although you do have to troubleshoot a few things yourself.

There is also a Piratebox application that you can install on a rooted Android. Note though that it has even less support and is very buggy unless your phone runs the Kali Nethunter ROM.

The future does not look very bright for Piratebox, to be brutally honest. However, it'll take you less than US$30 to try it out, and it's really not too late to do so. Think of it as your post-apocalypse server, keep it in your bag, back up your photos into it instead of Google Photos or Amazon Photos. Even if society crumbles, your photos will still be safe.

-------------------------


## IRIS (WHATSAPP REPLACEMENT)
Project Status: Active

Concept: ★★★★☆ (4 out of 5)

Execution: ★★★★☆ (4 out of 5)

Community: ★★☆☆☆ (2 out of 5)

Website: http://iris.to

Personal Comments
There is no shortage of messenger applications these days, but I'm old enough to remember how many generations of these kinds of apps came and went. The trend started with mIRC, which was installed in every internet cafe and was the first piece of chat software everyone knew about. Then came the domination of Yahoo Messenger. Then came ICQ. Also, in some parts of the world, Blackberry Messenger.

The current battle of the chat applications -- Whatsapp, Telegram, Signal, Facebook Messenger -- is just the most recent kerfuffle in a decades-long war.

Here's the problem: In my opinion, we're headed the wrong way. IRC was, and still is, a very open protocol you can host on your own PC. Yahoo and ICQ -- not so much. And now the two dominant chat apps, Whatsapp and Facebook Messenger, owned by a single company, which also happens to be the largest data company in the world.

Yes, all of these chat apps offer end-to-end encryption, ensuring that your data stays on your device. However, these apps still operate on proprietary code you can't audit, and they still get access to your phone number and contacts list. More to the point -- they're centralized, and have all the issues that come with centralization.

Iris Messenger is totally different. You'll see.

What Exactly Is It?
Iris is a fully open-source messenger with no phone number, or signup, or even app download required. The app is peer-to-peer and offline-first. This means you can actually use the app to communicate between devices in a local offline network. That's a huge deal, since once you've gotten a meshnet set up between you and your target, you can start a chat whether you have an internet connection or not.

Of course, Iris also works over a regular internet connection and works just like a regular chat app, with a couple of huge benefits: All your data is kept on your device, and you can start a chat with someone who doesn't even have the app, by just sending her an Iris.to link.

Walkthrough
When you open Iris.to on any browser, you'll find a prompt to enter your nickname. No logins required, no phone number needed, no access to your contacts requested. If you click "Already have an account?" you won't find a prompt to enter your phone, your email, or anything else to "recover your password". Instead, you get asked to fill your private key in, via textbox or QR scan.



The website works really well across browsers and devices. Once you're in, you can copy an iris.to link so people can privately chat with you, or create a group and generate a link for people to join that group. Or choose to create a QR code instead, which you can print out or show on your screen.



Here's a sample group link. Go ahead, try clicking it. It will take you directly to the prompt that asks for your name, and then directly into the Decentricity group I just created. Your browser generates your private keys behind the scenes, and every time you open the iris.to website you'll see all your groups and chats.

If you look around you'll find that with a bit of WebRTC setup, you can make video calls. You can also copy your private keys so you can always recover your account on any device. To enable local offline chats, you can set up P2P nodes of your own and federate them to existing nodes you're connected to. This little web-based app even gives you notifications when messages come in.

Ready for the next step? Find the Download Link and choose your OS to download the desktop app. I've tried the app in Ubuntu and Windows, it runs like butter on both platforms. The best thing about this app, of course, is that it allows offline connectivity between users in the same local network.

Use Cases
I'd love to see a zombie movie that features this app. If society totally breaks down and we had to rebuild communications from scratch, Iris.to would be the way to do it.

Planning your next secret tryst? Spin up an Iris chat window and have your partner scan the QR code.

Want to deploy customer service for a website/event/venue , but not sure whether you should use Whatsapp, Telegram, or some other chat app? Use Iris QR codes instead, and chat with your customers without them having to go through lengthy download and login processes.

I mean, it's a chat app. The possibilities are endless.

Why Hasn't It Caught On?
I have no idea. Their Facebook page is 6 years old and only has 135 likes last time I checked. There's a paltry list of articles shared on the page, none of them on mainstream media, and trying to Google the project by its chosen name, "Iris Messenger" yields nothing on the first page of Google.

Fighting the huge social & tech giants can't be that easy or cheap, and looking around their sites, I think the only monetization model they have is through bitcoin donations. Judging from the amount of people on their Facebook page, I'm not sure they're getting a lot of those.

What Is Next For Iris Messenger?
Iris is high-quality software, in my opinion. The experience is well-designed, account creation is instantaneous, and the apps & websites run well. Sure, there are some rough spots -- spinning up new host nodes isn't as straightforward as it should be, and the Linux AppImage doesn't package-update -- but those are only tiny flaws in what is an absolute minimalistic gem of a chat app.

I think you should use it. I think you should tell your friends to use it. I think you should send your iris.to group invites in your Whatsapp groups and tell them to chat with you on Iris instead. I think you should use your iris.to link in event posters, Linkedin profile, and your Instagram bio. If we want a truly decentralized future, this decentralized chat app needs to go viral.



And if you have a few Satoshis laying around, you should donate to them. Here's their bitcoin address:

3GopC1ijpZktaGLXHb7atugPj9zPGyQeST
-------------------------


## COMMOTION WIRELESS
Project Status: Low Activity

Concept: ★★★★☆ (4 out of 5)

Execution: ★★☆☆☆ (2 out of 5)

Community: ★★☆☆☆ (2 out of 5)

Website: https://commotionwireless.net

Personal Comments
If you've been on the internet for awhile, you've probably already heard of the concept of mesh networks. As such, Commotion Wireless is not a very unique concept, per-se. However, the way Commotion Wireless is envisioned is something I really like. Unlike other meshnet projects that are only aimed towards individual hobbyists or enterprises, these guys aim to enable and empower communities. The websites include complete guides, both technical and non-technical, for a community to implement a full-scale mesh network.

One unfortunate thing about Commotion Wireless is the fact that they haven't updated most of their packages in awhile. Their Android apk is signed 2012 and there is only one release. But I decided to choose this project for my page since their approach needs to be copied by other decentralized projects out there. Instead of just focusing on the developers and hobbyists, projects need to focus on the wider community. If you can get all your neighbors to install meshnet nodes, you'd have a network that is orders of magnitude more valuable than a network where only the "geeks" and hobbyists have nodes.

What Exactly Is It?
A mesh network is a network of nodes (consisting of routers, phones, or other computing devices) that communicate to each other using common wireless protocols to "blanket" an area with wireless connectivity. Wireless internet is broadcast out of every node in the meshnet, and provides connectivity for other devices in the network that aren't nodes. What's more, communication between the computing devices in the meshnet can be done "locally" -- without a public internet connection -- even if the two computing devices are very far away, as long as there is a route through the meshnet between the two devices.

Commotion Wireless is a meshnet implementation that aims to create community wireless networks from the outset. I like it because it's complete (mobile, PC, and router variants are available) and makes it very practical for communities to make a MeshNet.

It's NOT the only meshnet around, though. Check out this GitHub for a list of other awesome ones. Special mentions: FreeNetProject, IPFS, and Project Meshnet itself, now known as Hyperboria.

Use Case
Imagine having a meshnet envelop a whole neighborhood, a whole city, or even a whole country. Then imagine these mesh networks connecting to each other. You'd actually have a truly decentralized alternative to the current internet, with no ISPs, no centralized chat servers that steal your data, no tech giants observing your behavior. You wouldn't even need your telco company.

Meshnets like Commotion Wireless are game changers for countries where free speech is censored.

Walkthrough
When you open the Commotion Wireless main site, you''d be welcomed by a friendly menu asking you to choose between the approaches you'd prefer. The central approach is the CCK -- the Commotion Construction Kit -- but you can also go directly to Download & Documentation if you'd prefer.


Going into the CCK page, we see that it includes a "do it ourselves" guide to building a community wireless network. Everything is open source, printer friendly, and you can even download a zip file containing all the documents if you'd like to distribute them offline.

Taking a look at the Table of Contents, we see that the CCK is not just a technical guide -- it's an organizing and planning guide as well.


Going back into the main page and clicking "Download" would bring you to a page where you can try out one of the commotion wireless implementation models. You basically choose between whether you'd like to install Commotion Wireless on a router, a PC, or a mobile phone. Yes, your (rooted Android) phone can be a meshnet node.


You might have noticed that it says that Commotion Android is "to be released in early 2014", and alarm bells might be ringing in your head. Especially when you click through to "phones" and it shows that the last release was in 2012. Yes, this is hardly Enterprise-grade implementation.

But it works.

I've actually tried Commotion Wireless back in 2017 with two TP-Link routers and a rooted phone. Everything connects, everything was relatively easy to set up, and if I wanted to blanket my housing complex with Commotion intranet, I would have been able to.

Why Hasn't It Caught On?
My opinion:

Meshnets in general haven't caught on because the mainstream internet is so ubiquitous in the First World. Everyone is online, everywhere, and there is no need for an "alternate internet".

Meshnets also haven't caught on because of the lack of applications built for meshnets, and the ubiquitousness of applications or websites built for the regular internet (Facebook, Netflix, etc).

Meshnet implementation is seen as technologically challenging and are only done by networking geeks.

Commotion Wireless has actually caught on -- there were city-wide implementations back in 2013 -- but I don't think it has been maintained, because of the lack of incentives for people to work on these meshnet projects. I think Commotion caught on in the wrong area of the world: most Commotion implementations are in the US or Europe, where there is relatively little connectivity problems. There is no incentive for adoption or expansion in these communities. And thus, ironically, the Commotion Wireless communities dwindled in number.

What's Next for Commotion Wireless?
I'm going to deliberately conflate this with the question "what's next for meshnets?"

My answers:

Meshnets need to go plug-and-play, and it needs to use the Commotion Wireless strategy of being very community-focused. Make it as seamless as possible for a community to plan, purchase, and build everything they need to get a meshnet up and running.

These seamless, plug-and-play meshnets need to to be targeted to third-world countries or remote regions with connectivity problems.

Meshnets need a way to incentivize node runners. Here are some alternatives:

The thing that immediately comes to mind is the Blockchain route of treating each node runners as miners and basically allowing them to receive tokens. A bunch of projects online are trying to do this, including:

SmartMesh.io --> payment-focused meshnet with light blockchain nodes implemented in IoT devices.

Althea --> lets routers share internet connectivity and have these routers directly pay each other for the bandwidth. (I might actually review this one later since I think it sounds cool.)

You can get funding from an NGO / govt entity and have them donate these funds to volunteer node runners in a remote region. Check with the United Nations Broadband Commission, Electronic Frontier Foundation, or other NGOs. Or contact your local city government for a partnership.

A company can actually help deploy meshnet nodes for a region. "Wait," you might say, "How is this different from an ISP model of deployment?" The difference would be that these meshnet companies would only be selling the nodes, and maybe some troubleshooting services. The control of the nodes would still reside with the node holders -- i.e., the households and individuals in the community.

You can create a "killer app" for a meshnet platform that drives people to use it simply because they want to access the application's function or content. This could be anything from social media apps, chat apps, or media streaming apps. Package your app in the open source wrappers that Commotion Wireless has provided, and share them far and wide.

